Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
suxamethonium and depolarising neuromuscular block.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss suxamethonium. What is it,
and where does it sit among the neuromuscular blocking drugs?
Suxamethonium, also called succinylcholine,
is the only depolarising neuromuscular blocking drug in clinical use.
Structurally it is two molecules of acetylcholine joined together,
which is the key to its action.
It is a neuromuscular blocker that produces rapid, profound, short-lived paralysis,
and its defining feature is the speed of its onset and the brevity of its action,
which no non-depolarising agent quite matches.
Its principal role is to provide rapid muscle relaxation for tracheal intubation,
classically in rapid-sequence induction where the airway must be secured quickly,
and to relieve laryngospasm.
It is, however, a drug with a long and troublesome list of adverse effects,
so it is reserved for situations where its unique speed is genuinely needed,
and its use has declined as alternatives have emerged.
Describe its mechanism of action.
Because it resembles acetylcholine,
suxamethonium binds to and activates the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors at the
neuromuscular junction, opening the ion channels and depolarising the motor
end-plate, which initially produces the disorganised muscle contractions seen as
fasciculations.
Unlike acetylcholine, however, it is not rapidly hydrolysed at the junction by
acetylcholinesterase, so it remains bound and the end-plate stays depolarised.
A persistently depolarised end-plate cannot respond to further stimulation,
because the adjacent sodium channels become inactivated and cannot reset,
so neuromuscular transmission is blocked.
This is a depolarising, or phase one, block,
characterised by the initial fasciculations and by an absence of fade and
post-tetanic potentiation on monitoring. The block persists until the suxamethonium
diffuses away from the junction to be hydrolysed in the plasma.
How is it metabolised, and what determines its short duration?
Suxamethonium is hydrolysed rapidly in the plasma by the enzyme plasma
cholinesterase, also called pseudocholinesterase or butyrylcholinesterase,
which is produced by the liver.
After an intravenous dose, the great majority is broken down in the plasma before
it ever reaches the neuromuscular junction,
and the block terminates as the drug diffuses back down its concentration gradient
from the junction into the plasma to be hydrolysed.
This rapid plasma hydrolysis is what gives suxamethonium its short duration of
action, of the order of a few minutes,
allowing spontaneous recovery soon after a single dose.
Its onset is correspondingly rapid, within about thirty to sixty seconds.
So plasma cholinesterase activity governs the duration,
and any reduction in that enzyme prolongs the block,
which is the basis of suxamethonium apnoea.
What is its dose and its principal indication?
The intubating dose of suxamethonium is around one to one-and-a-half milligrams per
kilogram intravenously, producing excellent intubating conditions within about a
minute.
Its principal indication is rapid-sequence induction,
where the airway must be secured rapidly in the patient at risk of aspiration,
its rapid onset and offset being ideally suited to this;
the short duration means that, if intubation fails,
neuromuscular function returns relatively quickly.
It is also used to relieve laryngospasm that does not respond to other measures,
often in a smaller dose, and where brief intense relaxation is needed.
So its use is defined by its speed:
it is chosen where rapid securing of the airway is the priority,
and increasingly only where a non-depolarising alternative with reversal is not
preferred.
Now its adverse effects. Begin with the hyperkalaemia.
Suxamethonium causes a release of potassium from muscle as it depolarises the
membrane, raising the serum potassium by a small amount,
around half a millimole per litre, in the normal patient, which is usually harmless.
The danger is an exaggerated, potentially fatal hyperkalaemia in certain conditions
in which the muscle membrane has an increased number of acetylcholine receptors —
upregulation of extrajunctional receptors — so that depolarisation releases a
massive efflux of potassium.
These conditions include major burns,
denervation injuries such as spinal cord injury and stroke,
prolonged immobility and critical illness, and certain neuromuscular diseases,
the risk developing some days after the acute insult and persisting for months.
The resulting hyperkalaemia can cause cardiac arrest.
So suxamethonium is contraindicated in these states of receptor upregulation
because of the risk of life-threatening hyperkalaemia.
Continue with the other adverse effects.
There are many. It causes bradycardia and other arrhythmias,
particularly with a second dose and in children, through muscarinic stimulation,
which may require atropine. The fasciculations cause postoperative muscle pains,
or myalgia, common in young ambulant patients.
It raises intra-ocular pressure, a concern in penetrating eye injury;
intragastric pressure, though the lower oesophageal sphincter tone also rises;
and intracranial pressure. It is a trigger of malignant hyperthermia.
It is one of the commonest causes of perioperative anaphylaxis among the
neuromuscular blockers. It can cause masseter spasm,
which may herald malignant hyperthermia. And in high or repeated doses it can
produce a phase two block.
So suxamethonium has an unusually long list of adverse effects,
which is the main reason its use is limited and declining.
Explain suxamethonium apnoea and its management.
Suxamethonium apnoea is a prolonged paralysis after a normal dose,
due to reduced activity of plasma cholinesterase,
so that the drug is not hydrolysed at the normal rate and the block persists for a
long time — from many minutes to hours.
The cause may be acquired, from reduced enzyme levels in liver disease, pregnancy,
malnutrition or certain drugs, or inherited,
from genetic variants of the enzyme that are functionally abnormal.
The inherited form is characterised using the dibucaine number,
a measure of the proportion of enzyme inhibited by dibucaine:
a low dibucaine number indicates the atypical, abnormal enzyme.
Management is supportive: the patient is kept anaesthetised,
sedated and ventilated until neuromuscular function recovers spontaneously,
monitored with a nerve stimulator, and is not woken paralysed.
The condition is later investigated and the patient and family counselled and given
a warning. So it is managed by continued ventilation until recovery,
then investigation.
Distinguish phase one and phase two block.
Phase one block is the normal depolarising block of suxamethonium:
a persistently depolarised end-plate, preceded by fasciculations,
showing on nerve stimulation a reduced but sustained response without fade to a
train-of-four or tetanic stimulus, and without post-tetanic potentiation,
and it is augmented rather than reversed by anticholinesterases.
Phase two block, sometimes called dual block, develops with high doses,
repeated doses or prolonged infusion of suxamethonium,
when the character of the block changes to resemble a non-depolarising block:
it shows fade and post-tetanic potentiation on monitoring and may be partially
reversible by anticholinesterases.
The mechanism is thought to involve a change in the receptor and membrane after
prolonged depolarisation.
The practical relevance is that prolonged or repeated suxamethonium can produce an
unexpectedly prolonged, non-depolarising-type block,
which is one reason infusions of it are avoided.
What are the contraindications to suxamethonium?
It is contraindicated where the hyperkalaemic response would be dangerous:
major burns beyond the first day or so and for months after,
spinal cord injury and other denervating conditions,
prolonged immobility and critical illness with muscle wasting,
and certain muscular dystrophies and myopathies.
It is contraindicated in known or suspected malignant hyperthermia susceptibility,
as a trigger. It is avoided, or used cautiously,
in known plasma cholinesterase deficiency.
It is relatively contraindicated in penetrating eye injury because of the rise in
intra-ocular pressure, and there is caution in raised intracranial pressure.
It is contraindicated in those with a history of anaphylaxis to it.
And pre-existing significant hyperkalaemia is a contraindication.
So the contraindications flow chiefly from the hyperkalaemia,
the malignant-hyperthermia risk, and the pressure effects.
How does suxamethonium compare with rocuronium for rapid-sequence induction?
This is a central modern question. Suxamethonium gives the fastest onset and,
crucially, the shortest duration, so that neuromuscular function returns within
minutes if intubation fails — historically its great advantage for rapid-sequence
induction.
Rocuronium, a non-depolarising aminosteroid,
in a higher rapid-sequence dose gives an onset approaching that of suxamethonium
with excellent intubating conditions, but a long duration of block.
The decisive change is sugammadex, a reversal agent that can rapidly and completely
reverse even a profound rocuronium block,
so that a failed intubation with rocuronium can now be reversed promptly,
removing suxamethonium's chief advantage.
Consequently many now use rocuronium with sugammadex available for rapid-sequence
induction, avoiding suxamethonium's many adverse effects.
So suxamethonium retains a role but rocuronium with sugammadex is increasingly
preferred, and the choice depends on the situation and on sugammadex availability.
Pull it together: how do you regard suxamethonium in current practice?
I regard suxamethonium as a drug of unique speed but considerable liability,
to be used selectively rather than routinely.
Its rapid onset and uniquely short duration make it valuable where the airway must
be secured fast and a rapid return of function is wanted,
classically rapid-sequence induction and the relief of laryngospasm.
Against this stand its long catalogue of adverse effects — dangerous hyperkalaemia
in susceptible states, bradycardia, myalgia, the rises in intra-ocular,
intracranial and intragastric pressure,
its status as a malignant-hyperthermia trigger and a leading cause of anaphylaxis,
and the problem of suxamethonium apnoea.
Because rocuronium with sugammadex now offers rapid intubation with prompt
reversibility, I would increasingly prefer that combination for rapid-sequence
induction, reserving suxamethonium for specific situations,
and I would always check for its contraindications before use.
So it is a powerful but problematic agent of narrowing indication.
Describe the intubating conditions and onset more precisely.
After an intubating dose of about one to one-and-a-half milligrams per kilogram,
suxamethonium produces fasciculations within seconds and then complete block,
giving excellent intubating conditions — a relaxed jaw,
open cords and absent reflex response — within around thirty to sixty seconds,
faster than any non-depolarising agent at standard doses.
This speed is its defining advantage and the basis of its use in rapid-sequence
induction, where the interval from loss of consciousness to a secured airway must
be minimised in the patient at risk of aspiration.
The block then lasts only a few minutes before spontaneous recovery,
so that if intubation fails neuromuscular function returns relatively quickly.
So its very rapid onset and brief duration give ideal conditions for rapidly
securing the airway, which is the core of its value.
Explain the fasciculations and the technique of precurarisation.
The fasciculations are the visible,
disorganised muscle contractions produced as suxamethonium first depolarises the
motor end-plates before block supervenes.
They matter because they are associated with postoperative muscle pains and
contribute to the transient rises in intra-ocular,
intragastric and intracranial pressure.
Precurarisation, or defasciculation, is the giving of a small,
sub-paralysing dose of a non-depolarising blocker a few minutes beforehand,
which occupies some receptors and attenuates the fasciculations,
the pressure rises and, to a degree, the myalgia.
The trade-offs are that it can cause weakness and a feeling of heaviness in the
awake patient, and a slightly larger dose of suxamethonium may then be needed.
So precurarisation reduces the fasciculations and their consequences at the cost of
some complexity, and is used selectively.
What causes suxamethonium myalgia, and how is it reduced?
Suxamethonium causes postoperative muscle pains, typically of the neck,
shoulders and trunk, common particularly in young, muscular,
ambulant day-case patients, and attributed to the unsynchronised,
forceful fasciculations causing muscle damage,
supported by a rise in creatine kinase.
It is reduced by precurarisation with a small dose of a non-depolarising blocker,
which attenuates the fasciculations; the evidence for other measures is mixed.
Avoiding suxamethonium altogether, by using a non-depolarising agent where its
speed is not essential, removes the problem.
So myalgia is a fasciculation-related effect,
troublesome in the young ambulant patient,
mitigated by precurarisation or by avoiding the drug,
and it is one of the minor but real reasons to limit suxamethonium use.
Why does suxamethonium cause bradycardia, and when is this most marked?
Suxamethonium can cause bradycardia and other arrhythmias because it and its
metabolites stimulate cardiac muscarinic receptors,
producing a vagal effect that slows the heart and can progress to junctional rhythm
or, rarely, asystole.
This is most marked after a second dose given a few minutes after the first,
and in children, who have a more prominent vagal response,
in whom suxamethonium can cause profound bradycardia.
It is prevented or treated with an antimuscarinic such as atropine,
given beforehand particularly when a repeat dose is anticipated and in children.
So the bradycardia is a muscarinic effect,
exaggerated with repeat dosing and in children, managed with atropine,
and it is a further reason for caution with suxamethonium in paediatric practice.
Explain the rise in intra-ocular pressure and its relevance to eye injury.
Suxamethonium transiently raises intra-ocular pressure,
through contraction of the extra-ocular muscles during the fasciculations and
through effects on ocular blood volume and outflow.
In the patient with a penetrating, open eye injury,
a rise in intra-ocular pressure risks extrusion of the intra-ocular contents and
loss of vision, so suxamethonium is traditionally avoided,
or its pressure effect attenuated, in penetrating eye injury — although in a
genuine rapid-sequence induction the competing priority of protecting the airway
against aspiration may override this, and the rise is transient.
The technique then balances the airway and ocular risks,
often using a non-depolarising agent instead where feasible.
So the transient rise in intra-ocular pressure underlies the caution with
suxamethonium in the open eye.
Distinguish intragastric pressure and barrier pressure with suxamethonium.
Suxamethonium raises intragastric pressure through the fasciculation of the
abdominal wall muscles, which might be expected to promote regurgitation of stomach
contents.
However, it also raises the tone of the lower oesophageal sphincter,
and the barrier pressure — the difference between the lower oesophageal sphincter
pressure and the intragastric pressure — is generally maintained or even increased,
so that the net effect does not greatly increase the risk of regurgitation in the
normal patient.
This is reassuring for its use in rapid-sequence induction,
where aspiration risk is the very concern. Nonetheless the technique includes
cricoid pressure and other precautions.
So although intragastric pressure rises,
the simultaneous rise in lower oesophageal sphincter tone preserves the barrier
pressure, which is the reassuring point.
Quantify the normal potassium rise and explain the dangerous hyperkalaemia.
In the normal patient suxamethonium causes a transient rise in serum potassium of
around half a millimole per litre as potassium leaves the muscle cells during
depolarisation, which is clinically insignificant in most patients.
The danger arises where the muscle membrane has proliferated extrajunctional
acetylcholine receptors — receptor upregulation — so that suxamethonium depolarises
a vastly increased receptor population and releases a massive efflux of potassium,
producing a rapid, severe hyperkalaemia that can cause cardiac arrest with peaked T
waves, a widening QRS and asystole.
The conditions are those of denervation or major muscle injury: burns,
spinal cord injury, stroke and other denervating lesions, prolonged immobility,
critical-illness myopathy, and certain neuromuscular diseases.
So the small normal rise becomes a lethal one where receptors are upregulated,
which is the basis of the principal contraindications.
What is the time course of receptor upregulation, and what does it mean for timing?
The upregulation of extrajunctional acetylcholine receptors after a denervating or
major muscle injury is not immediate: it develops over the first day or two,
becomes maximal over the following one to several weeks,
and may persist for many months until the muscle recovers or stabilises.
The practical meaning is that suxamethonium may be safe in the very acute phase,
in the first day or so after, for instance, a spinal cord injury or major burn,
before the receptors have upregulated,
but becomes dangerous thereafter and remains so for months.
Because the safe window is short and uncertain and the consequence of misjudging it
is catastrophic, suxamethonium is generally avoided altogether once such an injury
has occurred unless it is certainly within the first day.
So timing matters, but the safe early window is narrow and best not relied upon.
Tell me about plasma cholinesterase, the dibucaine number and the genetic variants.
Plasma cholinesterase, also called pseudocholinesterase or butyrylcholinesterase,
is an enzyme made by the liver and present in the plasma that hydrolyses
suxamethonium and mivacurium.
Its activity and any abnormality are characterised by the dibucaine number,
the percentage by which the local anaesthetic dibucaine inhibits the enzyme in
vitro: the normal enzyme is strongly inhibited, giving a number around eighty,
whereas the atypical enzyme is poorly inhibited, giving a low number around twenty.
The gene has several allelic variants — the usual normal allele,
the atypical allele, the fluoride-resistant allele,
and the silent allele that produces no functional enzyme.
The normal homozygote has a high number and normal duration;
the heterozygote an intermediate number and slightly prolonged block;
and the abnormal homozygote a low number and markedly prolonged block.
So the dibucaine number distinguishes the variants causing suxamethonium apnoea.
What acquired conditions reduce plasma cholinesterase activity?
Besides the inherited variants, many acquired conditions reduce plasma
cholinesterase activity and so modestly prolong suxamethonium.
Because the enzyme is made by the liver, hepatic disease reduces it.
Pregnancy reduces the activity, as do malnutrition and severe systemic illness,
malignancy, renal failure and cardiac failure.
Certain drugs reduce it, including some that are themselves esters hydrolysed by
the enzyme, and the anticholinesterases, which inhibit it.
So a wide range of physiological and pathological states and drugs lower the
activity, producing a prolongation of block that is generally mild compared with
the inherited abnormal enzyme but is worth recognising,
particularly where several factors coincide.
The management of any significant prolongation is the same:
continued ventilation and sedation until recovery.
Set out, step by step, how you would manage suxamethonium apnoea.
On recognising prolonged paralysis after suxamethonium — a patient who makes no
respiratory effort and shows no recovery on the nerve stimulator long after the
expected duration — I would first ensure it is correctly identified and not due to
residual anaesthetic.
The essential management is supportive:
I would keep the patient fully anaesthetised and sedated,
so that they are not awake and aware while paralysed,
and continue controlled ventilation with monitoring, including a nerve stimulator,
until neuromuscular function recovers spontaneously,
which may take from many minutes to hours.
I would not attempt to wake or extubate until recovery is confirmed.
Afterwards I would explain to the patient,
arrange investigation of plasma cholinesterase including the dibucaine number,
counsel the patient and family about the inherited nature and implications for
relatives, and provide a warning for future anaesthetists.
So it is continued sedation and ventilation to recovery,
then investigation and counselling.
Describe phase two block and how it is recognised.
Phase two block, or dual block, develops when suxamethonium is given in high doses,
repeated doses or by prolonged infusion,
when the character of the block changes from the typical depolarising phase one
block to one resembling a non-depolarising block.
It is recognised on nerve stimulation by features absent in phase one:
fade of the response to a train-of-four and to tetanic stimulation,
and post-tetanic potentiation. The mechanism is thought to involve changes in the
end-plate and receptor after prolonged depolarisation.
Its importance is that prolonged or repeated suxamethonium can produce an
unexpectedly prolonged block with non-depolarising characteristics,
which is one reason suxamethonium infusions are avoided.
So phase two block is a change in the nature of the block with excessive
suxamethonium, identified by fade and post-tetanic potentiation,
and a further argument against repeated or continuous dosing.
What are the particular concerns with suxamethonium in children?
Suxamethonium is used cautiously in children for several reasons.
They have a more prominent vagal response,
so bradycardia is more likely and atropine is given.
More seriously, there were reports of unexpected hyperkalaemic cardiac arrest in
apparently healthy children with an undiagnosed muscular dystrophy,
in whom suxamethonium triggered massive potassium release,
which led to warnings restricting its routine elective use in children and to its
reservation for emergencies such as rapid-sequence induction and the relief of
laryngospasm.
Suxamethonium is also a trigger of malignant hyperthermia,
to which children are susceptible.
So in paediatric practice it is reserved for emergency airway indications rather
than routine use, with atropine for the vagal effects,
and with awareness of the risk in undiagnosed myopathy and of malignant
hyperthermia.
Why is suxamethonium contraindicated in myotonic conditions and certain myopathies?
In myotonic disorders such as myotonic dystrophy and myotonia congenita,
suxamethonium can provoke a generalised,
sustained muscle contracture — an exaggerated myotonic response — because its
depolarising action triggers the abnormal,
prolonged contraction characteristic of these conditions,
which can affect the respiratory and masticatory muscles and make ventilation and
intubation difficult, and it is therefore contraindicated.
In the muscular dystrophies, particularly the Duchenne and Becker types,
suxamethonium can cause life-threatening hyperkalaemia and rhabdomyolysis and has
caused cardiac arrest, so it is contraindicated;
this is the basis of the concern in undiagnosed myopathy in children.
More broadly, suxamethonium is avoided in the myopathies and in conditions with
abnormal or upregulated muscle membranes. So myotonic contracture and hyperkalaemic
rhabdomyolysis are the reasons it is contraindicated across the myotonias and
dystrophies.
What is the place of suxamethonium in obstetric anaesthesia?
Suxamethonium has long been the muscle relaxant of choice for rapid-sequence
induction at caesarean section under general anaesthesia,
because its rapid onset secures the airway quickly in the parturient,
who is at increased risk of aspiration and of difficult intubation,
and its short duration allows return of function if intubation fails.
It crosses the placenta only slightly, being ionised and rapidly hydrolysed,
so it does not significantly affect the neonate,
though plasma cholinesterase activity is reduced in pregnancy,
modestly prolonging its action.
With the advent of high-dose rocuronium and sugammadex,
a non-depolarising alternative is increasingly available for obstetric
rapid-sequence induction.
So suxamethonium remains a standard choice in obstetric general anaesthesia,
with rocuronium-sugammadex as a growing alternative.
What is meant by the self-taming dose, and is it effective?
The self-taming technique is the giving of a very small dose of suxamethonium
itself a short time before the full intubating dose,
in the hope of reducing the subsequent fasciculations and myalgia,
by analogy with precurarisation using a non-depolarising drug.
The evidence for its effectiveness is weak and inconsistent,
and precurarisation with a small dose of a non-depolarising blocker is the
better-established method of attenuating fasciculations where that is wanted.
So self-taming is a described but unreliable technique,
and it is not the preferred means of reducing suxamethonium's fasciculations;
in practice, precurarisation, or simply avoiding suxamethonium where its speed is
not essential, is preferred.
Give the duration and recovery characteristics in numbers.
After a single intubating dose of around one to one-and-a-half milligrams per
kilogram, suxamethonium produces intubating conditions within about thirty to sixty
seconds, and the block lasts only a few minutes — spontaneous recovery to adequate
neuromuscular function typically within around five to ten minutes — because of
rapid hydrolysis by plasma cholinesterase.
This is far shorter than any non-depolarising agent.
In suxamethonium apnoea, by contrast,
the block is prolonged from many minutes to several hours according to the degree
of enzyme deficiency.
So its normal recovery is measured in minutes,
which is precisely the property that made it the classic rapid-sequence agent,
with the important exception of the prolonged recovery in cholinesterase deficiency.
Summarise the anaphylaxis risk and how it relates to reversal.
Suxamethonium is one of the commonest causes of perioperative anaphylaxis among
drugs, the neuromuscular blockers as a group being leading culprits,
with recognised cross-reactivity between agents.
An important point is that, unlike a rocuronium block,
a suxamethonium reaction cannot be reversed by sugammadex,
which encapsulates only the aminosteroid agents — so sugammadex has no role in
treating suxamethonium anaphylaxis,
which is managed along the standard anaphylaxis lines with adrenaline,
oxygen and fluids, followed by timed tryptase samples and later allergy
investigation.
So suxamethonium carries a notable anaphylaxis risk,
and the availability of sugammadex does not help in that event,
which is one consideration in the wider move towards rocuronium with sugammadex.
Pull together the case for and against suxamethonium in one final answer.
The case for suxamethonium is its unmatched speed:
the fastest onset and the shortest duration of any neuromuscular blocker,
giving excellent intubating conditions within a minute and rapid recovery if
intubation fails, which made it the classic agent for rapid-sequence induction and
for the relief of laryngospasm.
The case against is its formidable list of adverse effects:
potentially fatal hyperkalaemia where receptors are upregulated, bradycardia,
myalgia, rises in intra-ocular, intracranial and intragastric pressure,
its status as a malignant-hyperthermia trigger and a leading cause of anaphylaxis,
the danger of suxamethonium apnoea, masseter spasm and phase two block,
and its hazards in children and the myopathies.
Because rocuronium with sugammadex now offers rapid intubation with prompt,
complete reversibility, I would increasingly prefer that combination,
reserving suxamethonium for selected situations and always checking its
contraindications.
So it is a uniquely fast but uniquely troublesome drug of narrowing indication.
How is suxamethonium used to relieve laryngospasm,
including where there is no intravenous access?
Laryngospasm that does not resolve with positive pressure,
deepening anaesthesia and jaw thrust can be broken with suxamethonium,
which relaxes the laryngeal muscles rapidly.
A small dose is often sufficient to break the spasm without full paralysis,
though a full intubating dose is used if intubation is then required.
Crucially, if there is no intravenous access — a common scenario in a child during
inhalational induction — suxamethonium can be given by the intramuscular route,
which works within a few minutes, or by other routes such as intralingual or
intraosseous; an antimuscarinic is given alongside, especially in children,
because of the bradycardia.
So suxamethonium is a key rescue for refractory laryngospasm,
and its efficacy by the intramuscular route makes it valuable when no vein is
available, which is one of its enduring indications.
What is masseter spasm, and how does it relate to malignant hyperthermia?
Masseter spasm is a sustained, marked rigidity of the jaw muscles after
suxamethonium that prevents mouth opening, beyond the brief,
mild increase in jaw tone that can normally follow the drug.
It is important because it may be the first sign of malignant hyperthermia
susceptibility, and significant masseter spasm,
particularly if accompanied by generalised rigidity,
a rising end-tidal carbon dioxide or other features,
should prompt suspicion of malignant hyperthermia,
abandonment of triggering agents, vigilance and readiness to treat.
Even isolated masseter spasm warrants monitoring for the features of malignant
hyperthermia and later investigation.
So masseter spasm is a recognised response to suxamethonium that may herald
malignant hyperthermia, and it is taken seriously rather than dismissed,
given suxamethonium's status as a trigger.
Describe the rise in intracranial pressure and its relevance.
Suxamethonium causes a transient rise in intracranial pressure,
attributed partly to the fasciculations and to cerebral stimulation.
In the patient with already raised intracranial pressure or a space-occupying
lesion this is a theoretical concern, since a further rise could be harmful.
In practice, however, in a genuine rapid-sequence induction the priority of rapidly
securing the airway and avoiding the much larger rises in intracranial pressure
caused by hypoxia, hypercarbia, coughing and an unsecured airway usually outweighs
the transient, modest effect of suxamethonium,
and it is given with adequate anaesthesia,
often after precurarisation and with measures to blunt the airway response.
So the rise in intracranial pressure is a consideration but rarely an absolute
barrier, the greater danger being a poorly controlled airway,
and the transient effect is managed within a smooth induction.
How is a suxamethonium block monitored, and why is no reversal agent used?
A suxamethonium block is a depolarising, phase one block,
which on nerve stimulation shows a reduced but sustained response without fade to a
train-of-four or tetanic stimulus and without post-tetanic potentiation — the
opposite of a non-depolarising block.
No reversal agent is used for a normal suxamethonium block because it is so
short-lived: it is terminated by the rapid hydrolysis of the drug by plasma
cholinesterase, with spontaneous recovery within minutes, so one simply waits.
Indeed anticholinesterases would prolong rather than reverse it.
The exception is suxamethonium apnoea,
where the block is prolonged by reduced enzyme activity and is managed by continued
ventilation until spontaneous recovery, again without a reversal drug.
So a suxamethonium block is monitored as a phase one block and allowed to recover
spontaneously.
Does suxamethonium cause histamine release, and how does anaphylaxis to it differ?
Suxamethonium can cause some direct, non-immunological histamine release,
contributing to flushing and a transient fall in blood pressure with rapid or large
doses, though this is generally modest.
Distinct from this is true anaphylaxis, an immune-mediated reaction,
for which suxamethonium is one of the commonest culprit drugs in anaesthesia,
with cross-reactivity to other neuromuscular blockers.
The distinction matters: histamine release is a dose- and rate-related
pharmacological effect, mitigated by slow injection,
whereas anaphylaxis is an unpredictable immune reaction requiring full anaphylaxis
management with adrenaline, oxygen and fluids,
timed tryptase samples and later allergy investigation,
and avoidance of the drug and cross-reacting agents thereafter.
So suxamethonium causes both minor histamine release and, importantly,
true anaphylaxis, which must be recognised and managed and is a significant mark
against the drug.
In a failed intubation after suxamethonium,
what is the advantage of its short duration?
The classic advantage of suxamethonium in a failed intubation is that,
because its action lasts only a few minutes,
neuromuscular function and spontaneous ventilation return relatively quickly,
so that in a can't-intubate situation the patient may resume breathing and can
potentially be woken, providing a degree of safety that a long-acting relaxant
would not.
This was historically a major reason for choosing suxamethonium for rapid-sequence
induction. The caveat is that in a true can't-intubate,
can't-oxygenate emergency the minutes of apnoea may still be critical,
and waking the patient is not always achievable.
With rocuronium, the equivalent rescue is now prompt reversal by sugammadex rather
than waiting for spontaneous recovery. So suxamethonium's brevity offers a return
of ventilation in failed intubation,
an advantage now matched by rocuronium-sugammadex.
How is suxamethonium dosed in the obese patient?
Suxamethonium is dosed according to total body weight in the obese patient,
rather than ideal or lean body weight, because the dose required to produce rapid,
complete paralysis and good intubating conditions depends on the larger volume of
distribution and the increased plasma cholinesterase activity associated with
obesity, so dosing by total body weight gives reliable conditions.
This contrasts with many other anaesthetic drugs,
which are dosed by lean or ideal body weight in the obese to avoid overdose.
The point is clinically useful because the obese patient is often the one in whom
rapid-sequence induction and a secured airway are most important,
given the reduced apnoea reserve, so adequate dosing of suxamethonium by total body
weight ensures optimal conditions.
So suxamethonium, unusually, is dosed to total body weight in obesity.
Give a final practical summary of how you would use suxamethonium safely.
I would reserve suxamethonium for situations where its unique speed is genuinely
needed — rapid-sequence induction where rapid airway control is paramount,
and the relief of refractory laryngospasm,
including by the intramuscular route when no vein is available.
Before use I would check for its contraindications:
the hyperkalaemia-risk states of burns, denervation,
prolonged immobility and myopathy, malignant-hyperthermia susceptibility,
plasma cholinesterase deficiency, and significant hyperkalaemia.
I would give around one to one-and-a-half milligrams per kilogram,
by total body weight in the obese, with atropine available for bradycardia
especially in children and on repeat dosing, anticipate fasciculations and myalgia,
and monitor the phase one block, allowing spontaneous recovery.
I would be prepared for anaphylaxis. And where rapid reversibility rather than
spontaneous recovery is the safety net,
I would consider rocuronium with sugammadex instead.
So safe use is selective, contraindication-checked and prepared for its adverse
effects.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Suxamethonium (two joined acetylcholine molecules) is the only depolarising
blocker: it persistently depolarises the end-plate (phase I block,
with fasciculations, no fade, no post-tetanic potentiation),
giving the fastest onset and shortest duration.
Second, It is hydrolysed by plasma cholinesterase;
reduced enzyme activity (acquired or inherited — low dibucaine number) causes
suxamethonium apnoea, managed by continued sedation and ventilation until
spontaneous recovery.
Third, It causes a small potassium rise normally but life-threatening hyperkalaemia
where acetylcholine receptors are upregulated — burns,
spinal cord injury/denervation, prolonged immobility,
critical illness — the main contraindications.
Fourth, Other harms: bradycardia (especially repeat doses/children), myalgia,
raised intra-ocular/intracranial/intragastric pressure,
malignant hyperthermia trigger, a leading cause of anaphylaxis, masseter spasm,
and phase II block with high/repeated doses.
Fifth, Its unique advantage for rapid-sequence induction (fast on,
fast off) is eroded by rocuronium plus sugammadex,
which gives rapid intubation with prompt reversibility — increasingly preferred,
reserving suxamethonium for selected cases.
Thank you. That concludes the station.